# Pearl Millet

&#x20;**A. Land preparation:** Cultivation of field two times (cross ploughing) and harrowing once is sufficient to bring field to fine tilth. Use of plank tied behind the cultivator may be necessary to break large clods and more harrows may be required in case of fields infested with weeds.&#x20;

**B. Planting method:** Planting is done either by direct sowing of seed or transplanting the seedlings raised in nursery. • Direct-sowing: Generally, tractor or bullock-drawn seed drills or bullock plough are used for sowing. A-lines are planted by machine-drawn seed drill and R-lines are planted manually by hand dibbling in rows marked with stakes. Sowing equipment needs to be thoroughly cleaned to avoid contamination during sowing. • Transplanting: Transplanting enables easy adjustment in flowering time of parental lines in case they have large differences for flowering time. Transplanting saves expenditure on weeding and irrigation. It also saves time when field is occupied with any other crop. Transplanting requires 30-40% less seed than direct sowing and proper plant stand is achieved with required spacing. The parents of hybrid are sown in a nursery bed raised 10 cm above the ground level. Seed should be sown 1.5 cm deep to facilitate better germination and safe uprooting of seedlings for transplanting. Seed is sown in rows spaced 10-15 cm apart. Seedlings are transplanted in the field when they are 18-20 days old. Transplanting of seedlings older than 20 days might result in reduced tillering and low seed yield.&#x20;

**C. Field layout and row ratio:** Ratio of male and female lines depends on height and pollen producing ability of pollinator line. Standard female:male row ratio of either

Pearl Millet Seed Production and Processing 4:1 or 8:2 is followed for certified seed production (Fig. 8). Most common ratio is 8:2 due to ease of management. To ensure longer duration of pollen availability, staggered planting of male parent at more than one date is followed with a minimum gap of 3 days between two plantings of male parental lines. All sides of field should be covered with 2-4 rows of male line. For multiplication of A-lines, standard ratio of 4:2 for A-lines and B-lines is recommended.

**D. Seed rate:** The seed rate depends on planting method and row-to-row and plant-to- plant spacings. General seed rate recommendation for foundation seed production

is 3 kg/ha of A-line and 4 kg/ha for R-line and OPV. Seed rate of 3 kg/ha of A-line and 1 kg/ha of R-line is generally recommended for hybrid seed production. For production of nucleus and breeder seed, the seed rate is about 60-70% of the foundation seed rate.&#x20;

**E. Sowing time:** Every crop has a general sowing window in a particular geography, which is generally based on the cropping experience of farming populace. Date of sowing within the window impacts the yields. Sowing date optimization therefore,

is a critical requirement for yield maximization. Optimum sowing time is site- dependent and therefore, would require conducting pilot experiments in every new

geography before undertaking large scale seed production activity.&#x20;

**F. Spacing:** Optimum population is 1,00,000 plants per hectare and hence it is recommended to follow 50 cm row-to-row and 20 cm plant-to-plant spacing in certified seed production. However, in nucleus and breeder seed production row-to- row spacing of 75 cm and plant-to-plant spacing of 20-25 cm is followed to facilitate closer look at individual plants in order to identify and rogue out off-types, including pollen shedders in A-lines. Such spacing also allows better expression of plants and facilitates roguing extreme phenotypes in OPVs.&#x20;

**G. Fertilizer management:** Adequate amount of nitrogen, phosphorus and potassium is essential for proper growth and development of the crop. It is recommended to apply FYM @ 8-10 tons/ha and NPK @ 100:60:40 kg/ha. Basal dose of 40 kg N/ha is applied, and remaining nitrogen should be applied at tillering stage. Soils should also be analyzed for micronutrients, especially zinc, sulfur and boron, and those found deficient should be amended through proper micronutrient management.

**H. Water management:** Most of pearl millet seed production is taken during off season (January to April) which is rain-free period. Therefore, access to irrigation is essential to obtain good seed yields. The most critical stages of irrigation are tillering, flowering and seed development. The frequency of irrigation and amount of water supplied depend upon physical texture of the soil and crop requirements. Adequate soil moisture is also necessary for uniform seed germination in order to obtain good plant stand and high seed yields. Drip irrigation is increasingly being used in pearl millet seed production in Nizamabad area of Telangana state to optimize water use (Fig. 13). Precautions: • Excessive moisture conditions and prolonged drought should be avoided during seed production. • The irrigation should be stopped at hard dough stage or about 10-12 days before harvesting time to ensure dried conditions for harvesting.&#x20;

**I. Weed control:** Production of high seed yield of high quality requires good weed control in the seed production plots. In addition to reduction in seed yield, weeds are often a source of contamination by way of admixture at the time of harvest. Weeds in the seed production plot or nearby areas may also harbor a number of pests and diseases. Effective control of weeds at all the phases of crop growth is essential. Weeds must not be allowed to flower or set seed in any case. Hand weeding, intercultural operations or chemical is necessary to control weeds. Pre- emergence spray of Atrazine @ 1g/litre controls broad-leaf weeds effectively. Manual or machine operated weeder should be used before and after earthing up.&#x20;

**J. Disease control:** Effective control of all diseases is essential to produce a healthy seed crop. Diseases like downy mildew (Sclerospora graminicola (Sacc.) Schroet), Fig. 13: Certified seed production of pearl millet hybrid being undertaken in Nizamabad area of the Telangana state using drip irrigation. blast (Pyricularia grisea (Cke.) Sacc.), rust (Puccinia substriata var. indica) and ergot (Claviceps fusiformis Loveless) cause heavy yield reduction and affect seed quality also. Adoption of appropriate schedules of plant protection and roguing of diseased plants and panicles from time to time are essential to further check the spread of diseases. Following are the control measures for important diseases of pearl millet: • Downy mildew - Seed treatment with Apron 35 SD (2g a.i./kg of seed)&#x20;

• Blast - Three sprays of Nativo (tebuconazole 50% + trifloxystrobin 25% WG) @ 0.4 g/l or Tilt (propiconazole 25% EC) @ 1 ml/l at 10 days intervals were found most effective in managing pearl millet blast (Sharma et al., 2012).

&#x20;• Rust – One spray of Difenconazole @ 125 ml/ha) or Propiconazole @ 250 ml/ha at pre-flowering stage • Ergot – Spray of Ziram 0.1% (300 ml/500 l water)&#x20;

• Smut – Sprays of Zineb (2 ppm) at flowering stage K. Insect-pest control: Major pests of pearl millet are armyworm (Spodoptera frugiperda), blister beetle (Psalydolytta fusca Olivier) and shoot fly (Atherigona soccata Rondani) that need proper control to avoid yield losses in production plots. The control measures against each of these pests include:&#x20;

• Armyworm – Dust 10% Carbaryl or spray Endosulphan 35 EC (300 ml/200 l of water).&#x20;

• Blister beetle – Use light traps and spray Carbaryl 50 WP (500 ml/200 l of water).&#x20;

• Shoot fly – Spray Rogor (300ml/200 l of water) at 10 days interval from seedling stage to flag leaf stage. L. Male-female flowering synchronization:Synchronization of flowering of A-line with R-line in certified seed production plots is essential in order to ensure pollen availability in the R-line when stigmas emerge in the A-line. Synchronized flowering results in good seedset in A-line and higher yields in production plots (Fig. 14). The A- and R-line may differ for flowering due to their inherent genetic differences for this trait as well as due to their differential photo-thermal sensitivity. It necessitates generating information on flowering time of parental lines of hybrids in actual seed production areas rather than in experimental areas. Synchronization of flowering of A- and R-lines can also be enhanced by management interventions. Hastening of flowering time by 6-8 days can be achieved by 3-4 sprays of 4% urea at 2-3 days interval at boot leaf stage. Application of micronutrients also helps boost growth. Delay in irrigation to late-maturing parent creates artificial stress which is found effective in hastening flowering. If the difference in flowering time of parental lines is more, a practice of staggered sowing is followed. Removal of main shoot in early flowering parent also helps in synchronization of flowering of the parental lines. Non-synchronization results in poor seed set, low yield and thus practically a failure of seed production (Fig. 15). In recent years, a new technology has been developed to manage synchronization of parental lines in production plots. Landec Ag’s Intellicoat® Pollinator Plus® technology is being commercially used by seed companies to achieve synchronization of parental lines and to improve hybrid seed production of maize in US. When Pollinator Plus® seed coatings are applied to early flowering parental line, germination of coated seeds is delayed. By using this coating technology, seed companies can overcome the need for staggered planting of male and female lines and save on labour cost. This technology can be tested for its effectiveness in pearl millet. M. Roguing: The process of removal of pollen shedders from A-lines and off-types from parental lines in seed production field is called roguing. Pollen shedders are male fertile plants in an A-line with similar morphology. Pollen shedders in A-line are results of mutations or mechanical mixtures. Off-types are the plants distinctly

Fig. 15: Wrong synchronization in flowering of male- sterile line (central rows) and restorer line (outer rows) in seed production pearl millet resulting in poor seed set in male-sterile line different in morphological characteristics from those with typical characteristics of the line under production. The off-type plants may arise through mechanical mixture or out crossing and rarely as mutants. Adequate and timely rouging constitutes the most important operation in seed production (Fig. 16). Rogues differing from normal plants in phenotypes should be pulled out and discarded at the earliest possible stage of plant growth, before flowering to avoid genetic contamination. In case of pollen shedders, the best time for rouging is morning hours when the A-line will have least of the exposure to outcrossing and there is little wind movement. Precautions: • Pollen shedders should be removed before anther dehiscence. Removal of pollen shedders should be first in the morning activity and is the important aspect of quality seed production. • Off-type plants obviously differing in characteristics such as height, flowering time, colour of foliage, leaf size, shape, and orientation, tillering, panicle size, or any other morphological characteristic and diseased plants should be removed before flowering. Fig. 16: Rouging activity being undertaken in seed production plot of pearl millet hybrid

Roguing at maturity is also necessary to remove off-types not distinguishable earlier, and contaminants affecting the physical purity of seed. Roguing and sorting out of harvested panicles may be necessary in case of diseased panicles.
